\section{Background}

\subsection{Consensus and Paxos}
Assume we have a number of clients, each with a value that they'd like to
propose. Consensus is the challenge of agreeing on a single one of these
proposed values. A consensus protocol is a protocol that implements consensus.
Clients propose commands by sending them to the protocol. The protocol
eventually chooses a single one of the proposed values and returns it to the
clients.

Paxos~\cite{lamport1998part, lamport2001paxos} is one of the oldest and most
well studied consensus protocols. We'll see later that BPaxos uses Paxos to
implement consensus, so it's important to be familiar with \emph{what} Paxos
is. Fortunately though, BPaxos treats Paxos like a black box, so we don't have
to concern ourselves with \emph{how} Paxos works.

\subsection{State Machine Replication and MultiPaxos}
Whereas consensus involves agreeing on a \emph{single} value, state machine
replication is all about agreeing on a \emph{sequence} of values called a
\defword{log}. A state machine replication protocol involves some number of
replicas of a state machine, with each state machine beginning in the same
initial state. Clients propose commands to the replication protocol, and the
protocol orders the commands into an agreed upon log that grows over time.
Replicas execute entries in the log in prefix order. By beginning in the same
initial state and executing the same commands in the same order, all the
replicas are guaranteed to remain in sync.

MultiPaxos~\cite{van2015paxos} is one of the earliest and most popular state
machine replication protocols. MultiPaxos uses one instance of Paxos for every
log entry, agreeing on the log entries one by one. For example, it runs one
instance of Paxos to agree on the command chosen in log entry 0, one instance
for log entry 1, and so on. Over time, more and more commands are chosen, and
the log of chosen commands grows and grows. MultiPaxos replicas execute
commands as they are chosen, taking care not to execute the commands out of
order.

For example, consider the example execution of a MultiPaxos replica depicted in
\figref{ExampleMultiPaxosExecution}. The replica implements a key-value store
with keys $a$ and $b$. First, the command $a \gets 0$ (i.e.\ set $a$ to $0$) is
chosen in log entry $0$ (\figref{ExampleMultiPaxosExecutionA}), and the replica
executes the command (\figref{ExampleMultiPaxosExecutionB}). Then, the command
$a \gets b$ is chosen in log entry $2$ (\figref{ExampleMultiPaxosExecutionC}).
The replica cannot yet execute the command, because it must first execute the
command in log entry $1$, which has not yet been chosen
(\figref{ExampleMultiPaxosExecutionD}).  Finally, $b \gets 0$ is chosen in log
entry $1$ (\figref{ExampleMultiPaxosExecutionE}), and the replica can execute
the commands in both log entries $1$ and $2$. Note that the replica executes
the log in prefix order, waiting to execute a command if previous commands have
not yet been chosen.

{\input{figures/example_multipaxos_execution.tex}}
